# Lexical Structure

SQL input contains a sequence of *commands*. A command contains a sequence of *tokens*, terminated by a semicolon `;` (or end of input stream). Tokens are usually separated by whitespace (space, tab, newline).

A token can be a:

- key word
- identifier
- quoted identifier
- literal / constant
- special character symbol

*Comments* not tokens (treated like whitespace).

## 1. Identifiers and key words

**Key words** have a *fixed meaning* in the SQL language, e.g. SELECT, UPDATE.

**Identifiers** are *names of tables, columns, or other database objects*; depending on the command they are used in.

Identifiers and key words:

- Must begin with a *letter* or *underscore*. Subsequent characters can be letters, underscores, digits(0-9) or `$` (non-standard).
- Should be less than 63 bytes by default, or they'll be truncated (`NAMEDATALEN` defaults to 64, and the limit is NAMEDATALEN - 1)
- Are *case insensitive*, except for **delimited / quoted identifiers**(enclosed in `""`; can include spaces, ampersands(`&`) and more).
  - In SQL, unquoted identifiers are folded to uppercase. In PostgreSQL they're folded to lowercase.
  - A convention often used is to write key words in upper case and names in lower case.

    ```sql
    SELECT col_name FROM table_name;
    ```

>**NOTE:** A delimited identifier is always an identifier e.g. `"select"` is a name but `select` is a key word.

## 2. Constants

### 2.1 String constants

Arbitrary sequences of characters bounded by single quotes `'...'` e.g. 'Hello world!'.

To include a single-quote character within a string constant, write two adjacent single quotes:

```text
mydb=> SELECT 'Jane''s book';
  ?column?   
-------------
 Jane's book
(1 row)
```

Two string constants that are only separated by *whitespace **and** at least one newline* are concatenated.

```sql
mydb=> SELECT 'some'
mydb-> 'text';
 ?column? 
----------
 sometext
(1 row)
```

### 2.2 String constants with C-style escapes

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `e'...'` or `E'...'`. `\` begins a C-like *backslash escape sequence*:

Backslash Escape Sequence         | Interpretation
----------------------------------|----------------
\b                                | backspace
\f                                | form feed
\n                                | newline
\r                                | carriage return
\t                                | tab
\o, \oo, \ooo (o = 0–7)           | octal byte value
\xh, \xhh (h = 0–9, A–F)          | hexadecimal byte value
\uxxxx, \Uxxxxxxxx (x = 0–9, A–F) | 16 or 32-bit hexadecimal Unicode character value

```sql
mydb=> SELECT e'some\trandom'
mydb-> 'text\n\nthere';  -- e'' required only in first line
      ?column?      
--------------------
 some    randomtext+
                   +
 there
(1 row)
```

### 2.3 String constants with Unicode escapes

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `u&'...'` or `U&'...'`. Allows specifying arbitrary Unicode characters by code point (4-digit or 6-digit hexadecimal, prefixed with `\` or `\+` respectively).

```sql
mydb=> SELECT U&'d\0061t\+000061';
 ?column? 
----------
 data
(1 row)
```

### 2.4 Dollar-quoted string constants

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `$$...$$` or `$optional_tag$...$optional_tag$`. The optional tag is case-sensitive, and can be nested by choosing a different tag at each nesting level.

Contents are taken literally (no escapes), enhancing readability and eliminating the need to double escape characters.

```text
mydb=> SELECT $$Jane's book$$;  -- equivalent to SELECT 'Jane''s book';
  ?column?   
-------------
 Jane's book
(1 row)
```

Particularly  useful in function definitions in PostgreSQL.

### 2.5 Bit-string constants

Binary notation only allows 0 and 1 e.g. `B'101`, `b'111'`. Hexadecimal notation is preceeded by `x` or `X` e.g. `x'abc'`.

### 2.6 Numeric constants

General forms:

```text
digits                          123456789
digits.[digits][e[+-]digits]    123.45678e-9
[digits].digits[e[+-]digits]    .78e9
digitse[+-]digits               1234e+56
```

- At least one digit must be before or after the decimal point, if one is used.
- At least one digit must follow the exponent marker (e), if one is present.
- Any leading `+` or `-` is not part of the constant; it is an operator applied to the constant.

In most cases, a numeric constant will be automatically coerced to the most appropriate type depending on context.

```sql
mydb=> SELECT -123.456e-7;
   ?column?    
---------------
 -0.0000123456
(1 row)
```

### 2.7 Constants of other types

A constant of an arbitrary type can be entered using any one of the following notations:

- `CAST ( 'string' AS type )`

  ```sql
  mydb=> SELECT CAST (b'110' AS int); -- Standard SQL
  int4 
  ------
      6
  (1 row)
  ```

- `type 'string'`

  ```sql
  mydb=> SELECT interval '1 decade';
  interval 
  ----------
  10 years
  (1 row)
  ```

- `'string'::type`

  ```sql
  mydb=> SELECT '123'::numeric(5,2);  -- historical PostgreSQL
  numeric 
  ---------
    123.00
  (1 row)
  ```

## 3. Operators

```text
+ - * / < > = ~ ! @ # % ^ & | ` ?
```

Restrictions:

- `--` and `/*` cannot appear anywhere in an operator name: interpreted as start of comment.
- multiple-character operator names cannot end in `+` or `-` unless they also contain at least one of

  ```text
  ~ ! @ # % ^ & | ` ?
  ```
  
  e.g. `@-` is valid, but `*-` is not.

  This restriction allows PostgreSQL to parse SQL-compliant queries without requiring spaces between tokens.

- When working with non-SQL-standard operator names, separate adjacent operators with spaces to avoid ambiguity.

## 4. Special characters

- `$`
  - if followed by digits e.g. `$1`, represents a *positional parameter* in the body of a function definition or a prepared statement
  - can be part of an identifier or a dollar-quoted string constant.
- `()`
  - groups expressions and enforces precedence
  - is required as part of the fixed syntax of particular SQL commands.
- `[]` selects elements of an array.
- `,` separates the elements of a list.
- `;` terminates SQL commands.
- `:`
  - selects "slices" from arrays
  - is used in certain SQL dialects(such as Embedded SQL) to prefix variable names.
- `*`
  - in some contexts denotes *all the fields* of a table row or composite value
  - in aggregate functions, specifies that the aggregate does not require any explicit parameter.
- `.`
  - is used in numeric constants
  - separates schema, table, and column names.

## 5. Comments

A comment is a sequence of characters beginning with double dashes and extending to the end of the line e.g.

```sql
-- A standard SQL comment
```

C-style block comments are also allowed:

```sql
/* Multi-line comment 
* with nesting: /* nested block comment */
*/
```

Comments are removed from the input stream before further syntax analysis, and are effectively replaced by whitespace.

## 6. Operator precedence

Operator/Element                        | Associativity | Description
----------------------------------------|:-------------:|-------------------------------
`.`                                     | left          | table/column name separator
`::`                                    | left          | PostgreSQL-style typecast
`[]`                                    | left          | array element selection
`+` `-`                                 | right         | unary plus, unary minus
`^`                                     | left          | exponentiation
`*` `/` `%`                             | left          | multiplication, division, modulo
`+` `-`                                 | left          | addition, subtraction
(any other operator)                    | left          | all other native and user-defined operators
`BETWEEN` `IN` `LIKE` `ILIKE` `SIMILAR` |               | range containment, set membership, string matching
`<` `>` `=` `<=` `>=` `<>`              |               | comparison operators
`IS` `ISNULL` `NOTNULL`                 |               | IS TRUE, IS FALSE, IS NULL, IS DISTINCT FROM, etc
`NOT`                                   | right         | logical negation
`AND`                                   | left          | logical conjunction
`OR`                                    | left          | logical disjunction

> **NOTE:** Operator precedence rules above apply to user-defined operators that have the same names as the built-in operators: a `+` defined for some custom type will have similar precedence to the built in `+`.
>
> When a schema-qualified operator name is used in the `OPERATOR` syntax, the OPERATOR construct is always taken to have the default precedence for *any other operator* in the table above.
>
> ```sql
>mydb=> SELECT 3 * 2 + 4;
> ?column? 
>----------
>       10
>(1 row)
>
>mydb=> SELECT 3 OPERATOR(pg_catalog.*) 2 + 4;  -- * has lower precedence
> ?column? 
>----------
>       18
>(1 row)
>```
