# Introduction

SQL input consists of a sequence of *commands*. A command is composed of a sequence of *tokens*, terminated by a semicolon `;` or end of input stream. Many commands can be on a single line, and a single command can span multiple lines.

A token can be a:

- key word
- identifier
- quoted identifier
- literal / constant
- special character / symbol

## 1. Identifiers and key words

**Key words** have a *fixed meaning* in the SQL language, e.g. SELECT, UPDATE, etc.

**identifiers** are *names of tables, columns, or other database objects*, depending on the command they are used in.

Identifiers and key words:

- Must begin with a *letter* or *underscore*. Subsequent characters can be letters, underscores, *digits*(0-9) or *$* (non-standard).
- Should be less than 63 bytes by default, or they'll be truncated (`NAMEDATALEN` defaults to 64, and the limit is NAMEDATALEN - 1)
- Are *case insensitive*, except for **delimited / quoted identifiers**. A convention often used is to write key words in upper case and names in lower case.

  - In SQL, unquoted identifiers are folded to uppercase, whereas in PostgreSQL they're folded to lowercase.

  - Quoted identifiers are enclosed in `""`, and can include spaces, ampersands and more.

## 2. Constants

These include *strings*, *bitstrings* and *numbers*.

### 2.1 String constants

An arbitrary sequence of characters bounded by single quotes `'...'`.

To include a single-quote character within a string constant, write two adjacent single quotes e.g. 'Jane''s book'.

Two string constants that are only separated by *whitespace **and** at least one newline* are concatenated.

    mydb=> SELECT 'some'
    mydb-> 'text';
    ?column? 
    ----------
    sometext
    (1 row)

### 2.2 String constants with C-style escapes

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `e'...'` or `E'...'`.

`\` begins a C-like backslash escape sequence:

Backslash Escape Sequence         | Interpretation
----------------------------------|----------------
\b                                | backspace
\f                                | form feed
\n                                | newline
\r                                | carriage return
\t                                | tab
\o, \oo, \ooo (o = 0–7)           | octal byte value
\xh, \xhh (h = 0–9, A–F)          | hexadecimal byte value
\uxxxx, \Uxxxxxxxx (x = 0–9, A–F) | 16 or 32-bit hexadecimal Unicode character value

    mydb=> SELECT e'some\trandom\n\ntext';
        ?column?    
    ----------------
    some    random+
                  +
    text
    (1 row)

### 2.3 String constants with Unicode escapes

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `u&'...'` or `U&'...'`.

Allows specifying arbitrary Unicode characters by code point (4-digit or 6-digit hexadecimal, prefixed with `\` or `\+` respectively).

    mydb=> SELECT U&'d\0061t\+000061';
    ?column? 
    ----------
    data
    (1 row)

### 2.4 Dollar-quoted string constants

PostgreSQL extension. Specified by `$$...$$` or `$optional_tag$...$optional_tag$`. The optional tag is case-sensitive, and can be nested by choosing a different tag at each nesting level.

Contents are taken literally (no escapes), enhancing readability and eliminating the need to double escape characters. Particularly  useful when representing string constants inside other constants, as is often needed in procedural function definitions.

    mydb=> SELECT $$Jane's house$$;  -- equivalent to SELECT 'Jane''s house';
      ?column?
    --------------
    Jane's house
    (1 row)

### 2.5 Bit-string constants

Binary notation only allows 0 and 1 i.e `B'101`, `b'111'`.

Hexadecimal notation is preceeded by `x` or `X` i.e. `x'abc'`.

### 2.6 Numeric constants

    digits                          123456789
    digits.[digits][e[+-]digits]    123.45678e-9
    [digits].digits[e[+-]digits]    .78e9
    digitse[+-]digits               1234e+56

At least one digit must be before or after the decimal point, if one is used.

At least one digit must follow the exponent marker (e), if one is present.

Any leading `+` or `-` is not part of the constant; it is an operator applied to the constant.

In most cases, a numeric constant will be automatically coerced to the most appropriate type depending on context.

    mydb=> SELECT -123.456e-7;
      ?column?    
    ---------------
    -0.0000123456
    (1 row)

### 2.7 Constants of other types

A constant of an arbitrary type can be entered using any one of the following notations:

    CAST ( 'string' AS type )  -- standard SQL      CAST (b'101' AS int)
    type 'string'                                   REAL '1e8'
    'string'::type  --historical PostgreSQL         x'abc'::int

## 3. Operators

    + - * / < > = ~ ! @ # % ^ & | ` ?

Restrictions:

- `--` and `/*` cannot appear anywhere in an operator name.
- multiple-character operator names cannot end in `+` or `-` unless they also contain at least one of

      ~ ! @ # % ^ & | ` ?
  
  e.g. `@-` is valid, but `*-` is not.
- When working with non-SQL-standard operator names, separate adjacent operators with spaces to avoid ambiguity.

## 4. Special characters

- `$`
  - followed by digits, represents a positional parameter in the body of a function definition or a prepared statement
  - can be part of an identifier or a dollar-quoted string constant.
- `()`
  - groups expressions and enforces precedence
  - is required as part of the fixed syntax of particular SQL commands.
- `[]` selects elements of an array.
- `,` separates the elements of a list.
- `;` terminates SQL commands.
- `:`
  - selects “slices” from arrays
  - in certain SQL dialects(such as Embedded SQL), it is used to prefix variable names.
- `*`
  - in some contexts denotes *all the fields* of a table row or composite value
  - in aggregate functions, specifies that the aggregate does not require any explicit parameter.
- `.`
  - is used in numeric constants
  - separates schema, table, and column names.

## 5. Comments

A comment is a sequence of characters beginning with double dashes and extending to the end of the line e.g.

    -- I am a comment

C-style block comments are also allowed:

    /* multiline comment 
     * with nesting: /* nested block comment */
     */

Comments are removed from the input stream before further syntax analysis, and are effectively replaced by whitespace.

## 6. Operator precedence

Operator/Element               | Associativity | Description
-------------------------------|:-------------:|-------------------------------
.                              | left          | table/column name separator
::                             | left          | PostgreSQL-style typecast
[]                             | left          | array element selection
+-                             | right         | unary plus, unary minus
^                              | left          | exponentiation
*/%                            | left          | multiplication, division, modulo
+-                             | left          | addition, subtraction
(any other operator)           | left          | all other native and user-defined operators
BETWEEN IN LIKE ILIKE SIMILAR  |               | range containment, set membership, string matching
< > = <= >= <>                 |               | comparison operators
IS ISNULL NOTNULL              |               | IS TRUE, IS FALSE, IS NULL, IS DISTINCT FROM, etc
NOT                            | right         | logical negation
AND                            | left          | logical conjunction
OR                             | left          | logical disjunction

> **NOTE:** Operator precedence rules above apply to user-defined operators that have the same names as the built-in operators.
>
> When a schema-qualified operator name is used in the OPERATOR syntax (e.g. `SELECT 3 OPERATOR(pg_catalog.+) 4;`), the OPERATOR construct is taken to have the default precedence for “any other operator” - no matter which specific operator appears inside OPERATOR().
