# Table Expressions

A table expression computes a table. It contains a `FROM` clause that is optionally followed by `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`, and `HAVING` clauses.

## 1. The FROM Clause

Derives a table from one or more other tables given in a table reference list:

```md
FROM table_reference [, table_reference [, ...]]
```

A table reference can be a (schema-qualified) table name or a derived table (e.g. a subquery, a `JOIN` construct).

If more than one table reference is listed, the tables are **cross-joined** - the Cartesian product of their rows is formed. The result is a virtual table.

For tables which are parents, the table reference produces rows of all descendants, unless the keyword `ONLY` precedes the table name. Either way, only columns in the parent are produces, and those added in subtables are ignored.

### 1.1 Joined Tables

Derived from two other (real or derived) tables. The general syntax is:

```md
T1 join_type T2 [ join_condition ]
```

Joins can be chained or nested. `()` can be used to control join order, or else they're evaluated left-to-right.

### 1.1.1 Cross Join

Rows produced are a Cartesian product (every possible combination) of T1 and T2.

```md
T1 CROSS JOIN T2 | T1, T2 | T1 INNER JOIN T2 ON TRUE
```

If T1 had N rows and T2 had M rows, N * M rows are produced.

```sql
CREATE TABLE T1 (num  int, name  char(1));
INSERT INTO T1 VALUES (1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c');
CREATE TABLE T2 (num  int, letters  char(3));
INSERT INTO T2 VALUES (1, 'xxx'), (3, 'yyy'), (5, 'zzz');
```

```psql
mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1, T2; 
 num | name | num | letters 
-----+------+-----+---------
   1 | a    |   1 | xxx
   1 | a    |   3 | yyy
   1 | a    |   5 | zzz
   2 | b    |   1 | xxx
   2 | b    |   3 | yyy
   2 | b    |   5 | zzz
   3 | c    |   1 | xxx
   3 | c    |   3 | yyy
   3 | c    |   5 | zzz
(9 rows)

```

>**Note:** Joins bind more tightly than commas. `FROM T1 CROSS JOIN T2 INNER JOIN T3 ON condition` is not the same as `FROM T1, T2 INNER JOIN T3 ON condition`, since condition can reference T1 in the first case but not the second.

### 1.1.2 Qualified Joins

```md
T1 { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2 ON boolean_expression
T1 { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2 USING ( join column list )
T1 NATURAL { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2
```

`INNER`(default) and `OUTER` are optional. `LEFT`, `RIGHT` and `FULL` imply an outer join.

The *join_condition* is specified in `ON`, `USING` or `NATURAL`. It determines which rows from the 2 source tables are considered to "match".

- `INNER JOIN`:
  - Only rows that "match" in both tables are included.

    ```psql
    mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 INNER JOIN T2 ON T1.num = T2.num;
     num | name | num | letters 
    -----+------+-----+---------
       1 | a    |   1 | xxx
       3 | c    |   3 | yyy
    (2 rows)
    ```

- `LEFT OUTER JOIN`:
  - An inner join is performed.
  - Rows in T1 with no "match" in T2 are added, with null values in columns of T2.

    ```psql
    mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 USING (num);
     num | name | letters 
    -----+------+---------
       1 | a    | xxx
       2 | b    | 
       3 | c    | yyy
    (3 rows)   
    ```

- `RIGHT OUTER JOIN`:
  - An inner join is performed.
  - Rows in T2 with no "match" in T1 are added, with null values in columns of T1.

    ```psql
    mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 RIGHT JOIN T2 USING (num);
     num | name | letters 
    -----+------+---------
       1 | a    | xxx
       3 | c    | yyy
       5 |      | zzz
    (3 rows)
    ```

- `FULL OUTER JOIN`:
  - An inner join is performed.
  - Rows in T1 with no "match" in T2 are added, with null values in columns of T2.
  - Rows in T2 with no "match" in T1 are added, with null values in columns of T1.

    ```psql
    mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 FULl JOIN T2 USING (num);
     num | name | letters 
    -----+------+---------
       1 | a    | xxx
       2 | b    | 
       3 | c    | yyy
       5 |      | zzz
    (4 rows)
    ```

The `ON` clause takes a boolean value expression, same as in WHERE. A pair of rows from T1 and T2 match if the expression evaluates to true.

The `USING` clause is used when both sides of the join use the *same name(s) for the joining column(s)*. It takes a comma-separated list of the shared column names. Joining T1 and T2 with `USING (a, b)` produces the join condition `ON T1.a = T2.a AND T1.b = T2.b`.

Importantly, only one of the shared columns is returned in `JOIN USING`, whereas `JOIN ON` still includes them.

`NATURAL` is a shorthand form of `USING` that forms a USING list consisting of *all column names that appear in both tables*. If there are no common names, `NATURAL JOIN` behaves like `JOIN ... ON TRUE`, resulting in a cross join.

>**Note:** A restriction placed on the `ON` clause is processed before the join, while one placed in a `WHERE` clause is processed after the join. This matters a lot in outer joins:

```psql
mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T1.num = T2.num AND T2.letters = 'xxx';
 num | name | num | letters 
-----+------+-----+---------
   1 | a    |   1 | xxx
   2 | b    |     | 
   3 | c    |     | 
(3 rows)

mydb=> SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T1.num = T2.num WHERE T2.letters = 'xxx';
 num | name | num | letters 
-----+------+-----+---------
   1 | a    |   1 | xxx
(1 row)
```

### 1.2 Table & Column Aliases

Table aliases are temporary names given to tables, mainly for notational convenience. You may not refer to the original name afterwards.

```md
FROM table_reference [AS] alias
FROM table_reference [AS] alias ( column1 [, column2 [, ...]
```

`AS` is optional. `alias` can be any identifier.

The second form gives temporary names to the table as well as its columns. If fewer column aliases are specified, the remaining columns are not renamed.

You **must** use an alias when joining a table to itself, or if the table reference is a subquery:

```sql
SELECT
    *
FROM
    people AS parent
JOIN people AS child ON
    parent.id = child.parent_id;
```

### 1.3 Subqueries

Subqueries specifying a derived table must be enclosed in `()` and assigned a table alias.

```md
FROM (SELECT ... FROM some_table) AS alias_name
```

A subquery can also be a `VALUES` list:

```md
FROM (VALUES ('anne', 'smith'), ('bob', 'jones'), ('joe', 'blow'))
    AS names(first, last)
```

### 1.4 Table Functions

These are functions that produce a set of rows of either base (scalar) data types or composite data types (table rows).

Columns from tabke functions can be used in `SELECT`, `JOIN`  or `WHERE` clauses just like tables, views or subqueries.

Table functions may be combined using `ROWS FROM`, returning parallell columns; number of rows is that of the largest function result, with smaller results padded with null.

```md
function_call [WITH ORDINALITY] [[AS] table_alias [(column_alias [, ... ])]]
ROWS FROM( function_call [, ... ] ) [WITH ORDINALITY] [[AS] table_alias [(column_alias [, ... ])]]
```

Using `WITH ORDINALITY` adds a `bigint` column numbering the columns of the function result set, starting from 1, named 'ordinality' (default).

The special table function `UNNEST` acts on array parameters, returning columns as if `UNNEST` had been called on each parameter separately and combined using `ROWS FROM`:

```md
UNNEST( array_expression [, ... ] ) [WITH ORDINALITY] [[AS] table_alias [(column_alias [, ... ])]]
```

If no table_alias is set, the function name is used as the table name. In `ROWS FROM ()`, the function's first name is used.

If column aliases are not supplied, then for a function returning a base data type, the column name is also the same as the function name. For a function returning a composite type, the result columns get the names of the individual attributes of the type.

### 1.5 Lateral Subqueries

Preceding subqueries in `FROM` with the key word `LATERAL` allows them to reference columns provided by preceding items. Without `LATERAL`, each subquery is evaluated independently.

```md
SELECT * FROM foo, LATERAL (SELECT * FROM bar WHERE bar.id = foo.bar_id) ss;
```

`LATERAL` is optional in table functions since they can reference preceding items anyways.

A LATERAL item can appear at top level in the FROM list, or within a JOIN tree.

`FROM` items containing `LATERAL` cross-references are processed as:

- For each row of the `FROM` item providing the cross-refereced column(s), or set of rows of mutliple `FROM` items providing the columns, the `LATERAL` item is evaluated using that row or row set's values of the columns.
- The resulting row(s) are joined as usual with the rows they were computed from.
- Repeat for every row or set of rows from the column source table(s).

`LATERAL` is primarily useful when the cross-referenced column is necessary for computing the row(s) to be joined.

It is often particularly handy to `LEFT JOIN` to a `LATERAL` subquery, so that source rows will appear in the result even if the `LATERAL` subquery produces no rows for them.

## 2. The WHERE Clause

Filters rows of the derived virtual table from `FROM`.

```md
WHERE search_condition
```

where *search_condition* is any value expression that returns a boolean value. Only rows evaluating to true are kept (false, null are discarded).

>**Note:** The join condition of an inner join can be written in the `WHERE` clause or in the `JOIN` clause:
>  
>   ```md
>   FROM a, b WHERE a.id = b.id AND b.val > 5
>   -- is equivalent to
>   FROM a INNER JOIN b ON (a.id = b.id) WHERE b.val > 5
>   ```

## 3. GROUP BY & HAVING Clauses

`GROUP BY` groups rows in a table with similar values in the listed columns, to eliminate redundancy in the output and/or compute aggregates.

In general, if a table is grouped, columns not listed in `GROUP BY` cannot be referenced except in aggregate expressions.

In strict SQL, `GROUP BY` can only group by columns of the source table. But *postgres* columns in the select list and value expressions.

`HAVING` can be used to include only groups of interest. Expressions in a HAVING clause can refer to grouped expressions ungrouped expressions involving an aggregate function.

```md
SELECT select_list FROM ... [WHERE ...] GROUP BY ... HAVING boolean_expression
```

If a query contains aggregate function calls, but no `GROUP BY` clause, grouping still occurs resulting in a single group row. The same is true if it contains a `HAVING` clause, even without any aggregate function calls or GROUP BY clause.

## 4. GROUPING SETS, CUBE & ROLLUP

Grouping sets group rows just like `GROUP BY` clauses.

```sql
CREATE TABLE items (
    brand       varchar(20),
    size        varchar(3),
    sales       decimal(7, 2)
);
INSERT INTO items
    VALUES ('Foo', 'L', 10), ('Foo', 'M', 20), ('Bar', 'M', 15), ('Bar', 'L',  5);
```

```psql
mydb=> SELECT * FROM items;
 brand | size | sales 
-------+------+-------
 Foo   | L    | 10.00
 Foo   | M    | 20.00
 Bar   | M    | 15.00
 Bar   | L    |  5.00
(4 rows)

mydb=> SELECT brand, size, sum(sales) FROM items GROUP BY GROUPING SETS ((brand), (size), ());
 brand | size |  sum  
-------+------+-------
       |      | 50.00
 Foo   |      | 30.00
 Bar   |      | 20.00
       | L    | 15.00
       | M    | 35.00
(5 rows)
```

Each sublist of `GROUPING SETS` may specify zero or more columns / expressions, and is interpreted as if directly in a `GROUP BY` clause.

An empty grouping set `()` means that all rows are aggregated down to a single group.

References to the grouping columns / expressions are replaced by null values in result rows for grouping sets in which those columns do not appear.

```md
ROLLUP ( e1, e2, e3, ... )
-- is equivalent to
GROUPING SETS (
    ( e1, e2, e3, ... ),
    ...
    ( e1, e2 ),
    ( e1 ),
    ( )
)
```

`ROLLUP` is commonly used for analysis over heirachical data e.g. total salary by department, division and company-wide total.

```md
CUBE ( a, b, c )
-- is equivalent to 
GROUPING SETS (
    ( a, b, c ),
    ( a, b    ),
    ( a,    c ),
    ( a       ),
    (    b, c ),
    (    b    ),
    (       c ),
    (         )
) -- power set(all possible subsets)
```

Sublist elements in `CUBE` and `ROLLUP` clauses are treated as single units:

```md
CUBE ( (a, b), (c, d) )
-- is equivalent to
GROUPING SETS (
    ( a, b, c, d ),
    ( a, b       ),
    (       c, d ),
    (            )
)

ROLLUP ( a, (b, c), d )
-- is equivalent to
GROUPING SETS (
    ( a, b, c, d ),
    ( a, b, c    ),
    ( a          ),
    (            )
)
```

`CUBE` and `ROLLUP` can either be used directly in `GROUP BY`, or nested inside a `GROUPING SETS` clause.

Nesting a `GROUPING SET` clause inside another treats all elements of the inner clause as if directly written in the outer clause.

If multiple grouping items are specified in a single `GROUP BY`, the final list of grouping sets is the cross product of the individual items:

```md
GROUP BY a, CUBE (b, c), GROUPING SETS ((d), (e))
-- is equivalent to
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (
    (a, b, c, d), (a, b, c, e),
    (a, b, d),    (a, b, e),
    (a, c, d),    (a, c, e),
    (a, d),       (a, e)
)
```

The final set of grouping sets might contain duplicates, which can be removed using the `DISTINCT` clause directly on the `GROUP BY`:

```md
GROUP BY ROLLUP (a, b), ROLLUP (a, c)
-- is equivalent to
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (
    (a, b, c),
    (a, b),
    (a, b),
    (a, c),
    (a),
    (a),
    (a, c),
    (a),
    ()
)

GROUP BY DISTINCT ROLLUP (a, b), ROLLUP (a, c)
-- is equivalent to
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (
    (a, b, c),
    (a, b),
    (a, c),
    (a),
    ()
)
```

## 5. Window Function Processing

Window functions are evaluated after grouping, aggregation and `HAVING` filtering are performed. They won't see the original rows from `FROM/WHERE`.

Multiple window functions having syntactically equivalent `PARTITION BY` and `ORDER BY` clauses are guaranteed to be evaluated in a single pass over the data.

Currently, window functions always require presorted data, and so query output will be ordered according to one or another of the window functions' `PARTITION BY/ORDER BY` clauses. Use an explicit top-level `ORDER BY` if you wish to guarantee a particular order.
