# Generated Columns

A generated column is computed from other columns (Analogous to views for tables)

There are 2 kinds:

1. **Stored Generated Columns:**

    - Computed when they are *inserted / updated*.
    - Occupy storage like normal columns.
    - Similar to *materialized views*, but updated automatically.

2. **Virtual Generated Columns:**
    - Computed when they are *read*.
    - Occupy no storage.
    - Similar to views.
    - Not implemented in *postgres*.

To create a generated column, use the `GENERATED ALWAYS AS` clause in `CREATE TABLE`. The keyword `STORED` must be specified to choose the stored kind of generated column.

```sql
CREATE TABLE materials (
    name    text,
    mass    numeric,
    volume  numeric,
    density numeric GENERATED ALWAYS AS (mass / volume) STORED
);
```

```sql
mydb=> INSERT INTO materials (name, mass, volume) VALUES ('Chemical X', 10, 2);
INSERT 0 1
mydb=> SELECT * FROM materials;
    name    | mass | volume |      density       
------------+------+--------+--------------------
 Chemical X |   10 |      2 | 5.0000000000000000
(1 row)
```

In `INSERT` or `UPDATE` commands, a value cannot be specified for a generated column, but the keyword `DEFAULT` may be specified.

```sql
mydb=> INSERT INTO materials (name, mass, volume, density) VALUES ('Substance O', 14.7, 2.5, DEFAULT);
INSERT 0 1
mydb=> SELECT * FROM materials;
    name     | mass | volume |      density       
-------------+------+--------+--------------------
 Chemical X  |   10 |      2 | 5.0000000000000000
 Substance O | 14.7 |    2.5 | 5.8800000000000000
(2 rows)
```

| Column with a default             | Generated column                  |
| --------------------------------- | --------------------------------- |
| Evaluated once, on insert         | Updated whenever the row changes  |
| May not refer to other columns    | Usually refers to other columns   |
| Can use volatile functions        | Cannot use volatile functions     |

## Rules

- The generation expression can only use *immutable functions*, and cannot use subqueries or reference anything other than the current row.
- A generation expression cannot reference another generated column.
- A generation expression cannot reference a system column, except `tableoid`.
- A generated column cannot have a column default or identity definition.
- A generated column cannot be part of a partition key.
- Foreign tables can have generated columns (`CREATE FOREIGN TABLE`).
- For inheritance:

    If a parent column is a generated column, a child column must also be a generated column using the same expression. In the definition of the child column, leave off the GENERATED clause, as it will be copied from the parent.

    In case of multiple inheritance, if one parent column is a generated column, then all parent columns must be generated columns and with the same expression.

    If a parent column is not a generated column, a child column may be defined to be a generated column or not.

Generated columns *maintain access privileges separately* from their underlying base columns. So, it is possible to arrange it so that a particular role can read from a generated column but not from the underlying base columns.

Generated columns are, conceptually, updated after `BEFORE` triggers have run. Therefore, changes made to base columns in a `BEFORE` trigger will be reflected in generated columns. But conversely, it is not allowed to access generated columns in `BEFORE` triggers.
