# Numeric Types

| Name             | Storage Size   | Description                     | Range                                                                                    |
|:-----------------|:---------------|:--------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| smallint         | 2 bytes        | small-range integer             | -32768 to +32767                                                                         |
| integer          | 4 bytes        | typical choice for integer      | -2147483648 to +2147483647                                                               |
| bigint           | 8 bytes        | large-range integer             | -9223372036854775808 to +9223372036854775807                                             |
| decimal          | variable       | user-specified precision, exact | up to 131072 digits before the decimal point; up to 16383 digits after the decimal point |
| numeric          | variable       | user-specified precision, exact | up to 131072 digits before the decimal point; up to 16383 digits after the decimal point |
| real             | 4 bytes        | variable-precision, inexact     | 6 decimal digits precision                                                               |
| double precision | 8 bytes        | variable-precision, inexact     | 15 decimal digits precision                                                              |
| smallserial      | 2 bytes        | small autoincrementing integer  | 1 to 32767                                                                               |
| serial           | 4 bytes        | autoincrementing integer        | 1 to 2147483647                                                                          |
| bigserial        | 8 bytes        | large autoincrementing integer  | 1 to 9223372036854775807                                                                 |

## 1. Integer Types

`smallint`, `integer` and `bigint` store whole numbers (without fractional parts).

Attempting to store a value outside the allowed range throws an error.

`integer` (`int`) offers the best range-storage-performance balance.

## 2. Arbitrary Precision Numbers

`numeric` and `decimal` are equivalent, and are both part of the SQL standard. They are especially recommended for storing quantities where exactness is required e.g money.

Calculations on `numeric` values yields exact results where possible, but are relatively much slower than in integer or floating-point types.

- **precision**: the total count of *significant digits* to both sides of the decimal point. Must be positive.
- **scale**: the count of *decimal digits* in the fractional part. Positive or zero.

```sql
NUMERIC(precision, scale)
NUMERIC(precision)    -- zero scale
NUMERIC    -- unconstrained
```

>**NOTE:** The maximum precision that can be explicitly specified in a `NUMERIC` type declaration is 1000.
>
>An unconstrained `NUMERIC` is subject to the implementation limits in the table above.

The SQL standard requires a default scale of 0 (coercion to integer precision), so always specify precision and scale to ensure portability.

Values with a larger scale than that set will be rounded to the set scale. Then, if the new precison exceeds that declared, an error is raised.

>**NOTE:** `Numeric` values are stored *without extra leading or trailing zeroes*. The declared precison and scale are maximums, not fixed allocations (akin to `varchar`).
>
>The actual storage requirement is 2 bytes per 4 decimal digits, plus a 3 to 8 byte overhead.

The `numeric` type also includes the special values `'Infinity'` (`'inf'`), `'-Infinity'` (`'-inf'`) and `'NaN'`, case insensitive.

```md
inf + x = inf
inf + inf = inf
inf - inf = NaN
x / inf = 0
```

`NaN` is used to represent undefined calculation results. Operations with a `NaN` input yield another `NaN`, with some exceptions e.g. `NaN ^ 0`.

>**NOTE:** In most implementations, `NaN` is considered not equal to any other numeric value (including `NaN`).
>
>In order to allow numeric values to be *sorted* and used in *tree-based indexes*, *PostgreSQL* treats `NaN` values as *equal, and greater than all non-`NaN` values*.

When rounding values, the `numeric` type rounds ties *away from zero*, while float types round ties to the nearest even number:

```psql
mydb=> SELECT x,
mydb->        round(x::numeric) AS numeric_round,
mydb->        round(x::double precision) AS double_round
mydb->   FROM generate_series(-3.5, 3.5, 1) as x;
  x   | numeric_round | double_round 
------+---------------+--------------
 -3.5 |            -4 |           -4
 -2.5 |            -3 |           -2
 -1.5 |            -2 |           -2
 -0.5 |            -1 |           -0
  0.5 |             1 |            0
  1.5 |             2 |            2
  2.5 |             3 |            2
  3.5 |             4 |            4
(8 rows)
```

## Floating-Point Types

`real` and `double precision` are *inexact, variable-precision* numeric types - implementations of IEEE Standard 754 for *Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic* (*single* and *double precision*, respectively).

Some values can't be converted exactly to the internal format, and are stored as approximations, such that storing and retrieving a value might show slight discrepancies.

`real` has a range of around `1E-37 to E+37`, with a precision of at least 6 decimal digits.

`double precision` has a range of `1E-307 to 1E+308`, with a precision of at least 15 digits.

Values that are too large/small raise an error.

Input values with excess precison might be rounded.

Numbers too close to zero that are not representable as distinct from zero will cause an *underflow error*.

By default, floating point values are output in text form in their shortest precise decimal representation:

```psql
mydb=> SELECT 4.213327242424::real;
  float4   
-----------
 4.2133274
(1 row)
```

The `extra_floats_digits` parameter can be used to select the rounded decimal output. Setting zero restores the default. Negative values reduce significant decimals, and positive values select the shortest-precise format.

Floating-point types also include special values `'Infinity'` (`'inf'`), `'-Infinity'` (`'-inf'`) and `'NaN'`.

*PostgreSQL* also supports the SQL-standard notations `float` and `float(p)` for specifying *inexact numeric types*, where `p` specifies the *minimum acceptable precision* in binary digits.

`float(1)` to `float(24)` select the `real` type. `float(25)` to `float(53)` select `double precision`. Values of `p` outside the allowed range draw an error.

`float` with no precision specified is taken to mean `double precision`.

## 4. Serial Types

`smallserial`, `serial`, and `bigserial` are not true types, but notational convenience for creating *unique identifier columns* (similar to `AUTO_INCREMENT`).

The tables from the queries below are equivalent:

```sql
CREATE TABLE table1 (
    col1 SERIAL
);

CREATE SEQUENCE tablename_colname_seq AS integer;
CREATE TABLE table2 (
    col1 integer NOT NULL DEFAULT nextval('tablename_colname_seq')
);
ALTER SEQUENCE tablename_colname_seq OWNED BY table2.col1;
```

i.e:

- create a sequence
- create an integer column whose default values are assigned from a sequence generator
- Add constraints e.g `PRIMARY KEY` to ensure values are unique and non-null.
- mark the sequence as owned by the column, so that it will be dropped if the column or table is dropped.

>**NOTE**: Because `smallserial`, `serial` and `bigserial` are implemented using *sequences*, there may be gaps in the sequence of values which appears in the column, even if no rows are ever deleted.
>
>A value allocated from the sequence is still "used up" even if a row containing that value is never successfully inserted into the table column e.g in rolled back transactions.

To insert a value into a `serial` column, either exclude it from the list of columns or use the `DEFAULT` keyword.

`serial` and `serial4` are equivalent: both create `integer` columns.

`bigserial` and `serial8` create `bigint` columns.

`smallserial` and `serial2` create `smallint` columns.
